[Music]
seven civilian intelligence
during World War two various federal
civilian departments and agencies were
involved in intelligence activities
chief among these was the Justice
Department units principally involved in
intelligence included the criminal
division the war division the
Immigration and Naturalization Service
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation
responsible for prosecuting violators of
all federal criminal statutes except
those within the jurisdiction of the
antitrust and tax divisions the criminal
division exhibited intelligence
capability in its general Crimes section
where cases regarding the illegal sale
manufacture and wearing of Armed Forces
uniforms and insignia the harboring of
deserters the making of threats against
the president and the interference with
any plant mine or facility and the
possession of the government were
prepared its Internal Security section
organized as the National Defense
section in the summer of 1940 where
cases regarding espionage sabotage
sedition foreign agents treason
censorship and other aspects of internal
security were prepared and it's war
frauds unit established on February 4th
1942 under the joint jurisdiction of the
antitrust and criminal divisions to
locate and prosecute persons guilty of
frauds in the handing of war contracts
the war division established on May 19
1942 superseded the special defense unit
organized in the office of the Attorney
General in April 1940 ultimately
abolished on December 28th 1945 it
brought together a number of special
bodies scattered among the Justice
Department's regular components its
principal substructures included the
special war policies unit responsible
quote for directing and coordinating
activities of the Department of Justice
relating to espionage sabotage sedition
subversive activities and the
registration of foreign agents the
unit's subversives administration
section working with the federal
investigation directed investigations of
and organized the evidence relating to
subversive activities carried on by Nazi
communist and fascist elements in the
United States and recommended prosecuted
and other actions the Latin American
section assembled information about and
prepared reports on the control of
subversive activities in the Latin
American countries the organizations and
propaganda analysis section collected
analyzed and organized information on
individuals organizations and
publications in the United States that
were considered to be seditious or
potentially seditious the foreign
language press section made translations
from and made reports on the foreign
language press of the United States end
quote
footnote General Services Administration
National Archives and records service
the National Archives federal records of
World War two civilian agencies vol 1
Washington US Government Printing Office
1950 page 789 end footnote the economic
welfare section quote which originated
as the economic section of the Antitrust
Division in 1942 was transferred to the
War Division on August 28 1943 it's
chief functions were to collect
industrial information prepare reports
on enemy or enemy controlled Industrial
Organizations and aid in making this
information available for use in the
economic warfare efforts of the Allies
in the fiscal year 1944 the Bureau of
the budget designated the section as the
central agency of the government to
carry out research in the field of
international cartels the economic
warfare section was dissolved at the end
of 1945
the objectives of the section were one
to discover and analyze important
intercompany connections among European
and Far Eastern firms and the control of
these firms by Germans and Japanese - to
analyze the means by which German and
Japanese control could be eliminated
three to examine the legal problems that
might arise because of the use of
intercompany connections by the German
and Japanese governments as a means of
espionage and economic warfare four to
analyze intercompany agreements between
foreign and American companies in order
to determine their effects on American
trade and commerce and five to examine
the effect of cartel agreements among
foreign companies upon the trade
Commerce and business structure of Latin
American and other countries in carrying
out these objectives the section made
extensive investigations concerning
bombing objectives and enemy potentials
engaged in studies of particular aspects
of international cartels with emphasis
on the techniques employed by the
Germans to penetrate the economies of
other countries especially the United
States and Latin American countries
participated in the formulation of plans
and prepared guides for the
investigations of industrial combines an
enemy or enemy held countries during the
period of occupation and made studies of
the efforts of enemy interests to obtain
control of important assets in conquered
areas and to screen their efforts in
order to avoid the economic consequences
of defeat the section made analysis of
the chemicals iron and steel non-ferrous
metals electrical equipment and
electronic devices and the machinery and
tools industries of Germany the French
Swedish Swiss and other banking
institutions that might have helped to
establish and maintain German economic
influence outside of Germany the
international control of certain
commodities of international importance
such as ten fat's oil and industrial
diamonds and the IG Farben industry
end quote in the process of reviewing
registration statements and analyzing
the exhibits submitted by agents of
foreign governments as required by law
the foreign agents registration section
transferred from the State Department on
June 1st 1942 prepared reports of
intelligence value on both individuals
and organizations that had failed to
comply with the registration requirement
during the war the Immigration and
Naturalization Service quote continued
its peacetime function of administering
the laws relating to the admission
exclusion and deportation of aliens and
the naturalization of aliens lawfully
resident in the United States and it had
a special wartime responsibility for the
registration and fingerprinting of all
aliens in the United States end quote
the service had no investigators of its
own until 1946 so it had to rely upon
occasional assistance in this area from
the Federal Bureau of Investigation
nevertheless its information Holdings
served an Intelligence need the Federal
Bureau of Investigation served as the
primary investigative agency of the
Justice Department during the war period
its principal components included the
Office of the Director the
identification division fingerprints the
Security Division investigation the
technical laboratory analysis
development and application and the
training division in addition to its
regular field force of agents within the
domestic United States the bureau also
had a special Intelligence Group in
Latin America South America the
Caribbean Alaska and Hawaii this
extension of operational jurisdiction of
course created personnel problems quote
the grave security responsibilities
placed on the FBI and war forced
director J Edgar Hoover to relax
temporarily the rule that new agents had
to have a law degree or be accountants
the bureau had 2602 agents when the
United States went to war with a total
personnel of 7420
Hoover immediately sent out orders to
the field offices to begin interviewing
graduates of the FBI National Academy
who could meet all qualifications except
legal training the FBI had to be built
up to handle the tremendous volume of
work and it's agent force was to
increase to five thousand seventy to the
total personnel increased to thirteen
thousand three hundred seventeen on the
active roles two years after the
outbreak of war end quote
ways were sought to supplement the
bureau's information gathering work
force one innovation was attempted in
defense plant production security quote
even before the United States entered
the war the FBI had at the request of
the Army and Navy developed a system of
cooperation with workmen and defense
plants as a check against sabotage and
slowdowns and plants with government war
contracts in World War one the Navy had
initiated a plant protection program as
a means of reducing the fires explosions
accidents and labor frictions which
affected war production and the Navy
plan had been adopted by the Army and
the u.s. shipping boards emergency fleet
corporation in 1931 the military agreed
that in another emergency this work
should be handled by the FBI it was
through these specially designated
workmen who furnished information to the
FBI that it was possible to determine in
hundreds of cases that accidents not
enemy sabotage were responsible for
damaged material machinery and plant
equipment the informants were volunteers
end quote another opportunity to garner
supplementary personnel presented itself
when the American Legion in 1940 sought
to organize an investigative force to
ferret out subversives and seditionist
s-- these detection efforts were
complicated by the fact that the United
States was in a state of declared
neutrality with regard to international
hostilities at that time when the
Legionnaires laid their
plan before attorney General Robert
Jackson and were dismayed at his
response that such investigative
activities should be left to
professional law enforcement agencies
director Hoover came forth with a
proposal of his own quote the FBI plan
suggested a liaison arrangement between
post commanders and special agents in
charge of field divisions for
discussions of national defense problems
whenever a Legionnaire was in a position
to furnish confidential information
about a particular problem he would be
designated to make reports to the FBI
but any investigation would be made by
the FBI not the Legionnaire the proposal
was accepted by the American Legion at
its conference in Indianapolis in
November 1940 and this acceptance laid
the basis for the wartime cooperation
between the FBI and the Legion the
legions cooperation was typical of the
aid given the FBI by many civic
fraternal and professional groups the
security program also included local law
enforcement officers who were drawn
together for courses of instruction on
such problems as convoy traffic
protection of public utilities civil
defense organization and the
investigation of espionage sabotage and
subversion the lessons taught were based
largely on the British wartime
experiences these schools were attended
by 70 3164 law enforcement officers from
1940 to 1942 from this security network
the FBI received information not only
from the military intelligence services
but also from workers in industry the
Legion police officers and others who
were mobilized for the war effort
against this alignment saboteurs made
little headway end quote
the bureau jealously guarded its
intelligence functions and prerogatives
fought a number of agencies including
the Office of Strategic Services for
jurisdiction in these matters vigorously
opposed the concept of a new centralized
intelligence entity during the closing
months of the war
and otherwise emerged as a major
intelligence institution in the
aftermath of the international
hostilities at the Department of the
Treasury three agencies or units had
significant intelligence duties with the
entry of the United States into the war
the Secret Service took on additional
responsibilities regarding the forgery
and counterfeiting of the increased
number of government securities and
checks as well as ration stamps and
coupons presidential protection required
extensive security plans and
intelligence for the chief executives
trips abroad that involved journeys
through areas subject to enemy air
attack and for conferences in places
where enemy agents and sympathizers were
known to be present in addition the
Secret Service also had certain
responsibilities for the protection of
distinguished wartime visitors to the
United States necessitating an improved
intelligence capability regarding
individuals or organizations of
potential danger to the safety of such
visiting dignitaries after the entry of
the United States into the war the
Customs Service performed services with
an intelligence potential for both the
Treasury Department and other federal
agencies these duties which had a
bearing upon intelligence matters
included assistance to quote the State
Department and the foreign economic
administration by investigating firms
that applied for export licenses and by
preventing the unlicensed export of any
materials subject to export control end
quote
preventing quote the entrance and
departure of persons whose movements
into or out of the country would be
prejudicial to the interests of the
United States end quote
intercepting and examining quote
tangible communications carried by
vessels vehicles and persons arriving
from and departing to foreign countries
to determine whether such documents
contain matter inimical to the interests
of the United States or helpful to its
enemies end quote
participation in certain measures for
the protection of domestic ports and
vessels there
against sabotage and espionage and
furnishing quote the War Department with
statistical information on the import
and export of strategic war materials
end quote
footnote General Services Administration
volume 1 pages 754 through 755 and
footnote the division of monetary
research established on March 25th 1938
supplied information and intelligence to
assist the Secretary of the Treasury and
other departmental officials in
formulating and executing international
financial policy in addition to its
analytical units the foreign commercial
policy section the International
statistics section and the foreign
exchange and controls section being of
primary intelligence interest the
division maintained representatives in
London Paris Rome burn Lisbon Stockholm
Cairo Chongqing Nanking Shanghai and
Manila quote these offices conducted
financial studies and participated in
financial planning in the areas for
which they had responsibilities provided
representation on combined Allied boards
and committees and financial advisors to
diplomatic missions and represented the
foreign funds control abroad in such
places as Lisbon and Stockholm the
Treasury offices served also as
confidential listening posts for
gathering information important for the
operation of several agencies of the
United States government all of the
offices were responsible for collecting
financial intelligence the offices of
Treasury anti-phase which were closely
associated with the offices of Treasury
representatives were concerned only with
the collection and analysis of
information on customs matters both
classes of offices were administratively
considered as field offices of the
division of monetary research
besides staffing these offices the
division detailed personnel to the war
and navy departments to furnish
financial advice and aid to military
authorities outside the United States
the OP
thus detailed were usually organized
into teams or missions that were
attached to the military headquarters in
each theater of action or occupation end
quote
normally a Treasury Department agency
the United States Coast Guard in
accordance with the provisions of its
Organic Act was transferred to the Navy
Department for wartime service in 1941
and returned to Treasury Department
jurisdiction on January 1st 1946 an
Intelligence Division had been
established at Coast Guard headquarters
in 1936 administration of Intelligence
responsibilities was conducted through
15 district offices and special field
units quote Coast Guard intelligence now
formally provided for in the Coast Guard
regulations and organization manual drew
additional duties and manpower with the
coming of war it was responsible for
anti-semetic
and counter espionage on the waterfront
as well as security screening of
merchant marine personnel and
longshoreman it became involved in the
search for the Nazi saboteurs after a
Coast Guardsman spotted them wading
ashore with their boxes of dynamite on
an isolated Long Island Beach it was
charged with investigating Coast Guard
military and civilian personnel for
internal security and breaches of
discipline the intelligence divisions of
wartime force grew to 370 of which 160
were investigators its wartime
achievements on the homefront or in the
field of prevention in World War one
black Tom Island in New York Harbor a
major transfer point for supplies
shipped to Europe had been virtually
destroyed by dynamite and German
saboteurs were busy on a dozen fronts
but during World War two there is not a
single known instance of foreign
inspired sabotage on vessels or
waterfront facilities which the Coast
Guard was responsible for safeguarding
since World War Two the Intelligence
Division reduced to a peacetime force of
70 investigators has been mainly
concerned with port security keeping
versiv elements out of the Merchant
Marine and off the waterfronts enforcing
Coast Guard laws and ensuring the
internal security of the Coast Guard end
quote
while the Department of State received a
variety of information with an
intelligence potential from special
overseas missions roaming diplomats and
Foreign Service officers during the war
its intelligence production capability
was limited by the lack of personnel
specifically responsible for
intelligence collection a decentralized
organization which dispersed the
intelligence function and personal
presidential intervention in foreign
policy matters which prompted the
creation of special units serving
intelligence functions and reporting
directly to the chief executive on
foreign intelligence concerns
organizational problems resulting from
dispersed war programs administration
began in the spring of 1941 with the
implementation of the lend-lease act
quote this act and other acts relating
to the importation of strategic
commodities the control of financial
transactions the establishment of
priorities and allocations and other
foreign economic warfare programs not
only had a profound effect on the
general direction of United States
foreign policy and the position of the
United States and world affairs but also
brought about a vast expansion in the
department's foreign activities and
personnel this expansion occurred
chiefly in connection with the following
activities one the operation of the
lend-lease program involving the
negotiation of lend-lease agreements the
supplying of materials under these
agreements to the Allies and other
eligible countries and the procurement
of additional foodstuffs and raw
materials for the manufacture of
lend-lease goods to the procurement
abroad of additional foodstuffs and
strategic materials needed by the United
States for its own war program three the
control of exports of goods and funds in
order to prevent their shipment directly
or indirectly to the Axis countries and
to conserve materials needed for the war
the United States for the distribution
abroad of information concerning the
United States its policies and its
military activities in order to combat
enemy propaganda 5 the promotion of the
cultural relations program of the United
States on a larger scale especially in
the other American Republic and six the
conduct of the political and diplomatic
phases of the war especially those
phases related to maintaining the Allied
coalition and developing the United
Nations Organization except for the
last-named
activity the department was responsible
for supervising and coordinating the
programs but did not undertake to carry
out their operational phases instead the
following war agencies were established
to plan and effectuate the programs
relating to lend-lease preclusive buying
foreign propaganda cultural relations
and intelligence procurement the office
of lend-lease administration and the
board of economic warfare later the
foreign economic administration the
Office of War Information the office of
the coordinator of inter-american
Affairs and the Office of Strategic
Services these new agencies were
required by the President to conform to
the foreign policy of the United States
as defined by the Secretary of State and
their field representatives except those
of the Office of Strategic Services were
responsible to the Chiefs of the foreign
service establishments in their areas as
the war progressed all Foreign Relations
work tended to be centered in the
department it absorbed the long range
cultural programs of the office of the
coordinator of inter-american Affairs in
1943 prepared the way for the absorption
of the continuing functions of the
above-named war agencies at the close of
the war by creating offices to perform
related activities assisted in the
planning that led to the establishment
of the United Nations relief and
rehabilitation administration and
provided overseas military commanders
with political advisors to help them
govern liberal
rated areas in accordance with the
foreign policy of the United States
end quote against this background the
State Department does not appear to have
been a major intelligence producer
during the war it would seem that in
many regards the Office of Strategic
Services the office of War Information
the office of censorship the board of
economic warfare and the Armed Services
intelligence organizations supplanted
the department in many areas of
intelligence activity nevertheless state
did have an intelligence capability and
those entities involved in such
operations are profiled on November 22nd
1940s secret division of foreign
activity correlation was established
appearing two years later as a unit
within the office of the Assistant
Secretary of State for Finance Aviation
Canada and Greenland a departmental
order of October 31st 1941 indicated the
division quote was directed to interview
all foreign political leaders promoting
movements in the interests of their
peoples and Committees of foreign-born
groups visiting the department and to
give information on their activities and
obtain all possible relevant information
regarding their purpose organization and
membership end quote
footnote Graham H Stewart the department
of state a history of its organization
procedure and personnel New York the
Macmillan company 1949 page 348 and
footnote such information when obtained
would seemingly have intelligence value
within the office of the Assistant
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
previously the office of the Assistant
Secretary of State for commerce and
trade two divisions reflected an
intelligence potential in their
activities the division of world trade
intelligence quote was established in
the department on July 21st 1941 to
handle state department responsibilities
pertaining to the proclaimed list of
certain blocked nationals the division
was at first under the direct
supervision of assistant secretary
Dean Acheson but later became a part of
the board of economic operations and
successor economic offices on March 1st
1945 it was renamed the division of
economic security controls and as such
became a part of the office of economic
security policy on October 20th of that
year it's functions remained
substantially the same throughout the
war and included the application of the
recommendations of the inter-american
conference on systems of economic and
financial control except with respect to
the replacement or reorganization of
axis firms and the collection evaluation
and organization of biographic data end
quote
the division of commercial policy
previously the division of commercial
treaties and agreements when established
on July 1st 1940 and then renamed the
division on commercial policy and
agreements on October 7th 1941 included
correspondence and contacts with
American export-import interests and
making agreements with the foreign
representative negotiating for supplies
information derived from these
activities which seemingly have
intelligence value regarding the
structure of the export-import business
community its ties to the Axis powers
and to the Soviet Union and the
determination of strategic materials
being commercially imported by those
regimes one other Intelligence Unit
maintained in part by the State
Department was the economic warfare
division of the United States London
embassy and consulate general quote the
economic warfare division was
established in the embassy in London in
March 1942 and remained in existence
through June 1945 its professional staff
consisted of representatives of various
United States military and civilian
agencies its top personnel being drawn
to a large extent from the foreign
economic administration and the Office
of Strategic Services
although the division was created to
serve as a liaison channel between
agencies of the United States government
concerned with economic warfare
the British Ministry of economic warfare
it soon became an important operational
organisation its principal functions
during most of the war were to restrict
trade benefiting the enemy by means of
blockade control working with the
several sections of the anglo-american
blockade committee and neutral country
trade control to gather enemy economic
intelligence and to assist in strategic
bombing activities by March 1945 it was
concerned with post-war occupation
problems it began to gather data on safe
haven operations the prevention of enemy
property from finding a safe haven in
neutral territory to develop plans to
recover and restore enemy loot to
prepare studies on the German economy
and to collect and exploit captured
enemy records through the combined
intelligence objectives so committee and
the United States technical industrial
intelligence subcommittee when the
division was abolished in the summer of
1945 its functions relating to neutral
trade and safe haven objectives were
transferred to the United States mission
for Economic Affairs in London certain
residual functions were assigned to the
office of the economic minister
councillor of the embassy end quote
the department had its own cryptographic
unit known since January of 1931 as the
division of communications and records
located within the office of the
Assistant Secretary of State for
administration previously the office of
the assistant secretary of state fiscal
and budget officer administration of
department and Foreign Service the
components cryptographic
responsibilities included code
construction the development of
procedures and methods for using same
the selection of code equipment and the
maintenance of the security of
information transmitted by means of
cryptographic systems although the
division had no cryptanalytic function
it was nevertheless an immense
organization at the time of America's
entry into the war quote the division of
communications and Records was now by
far the largest agency in the department
its Telegraph's section had a
chief an assistant chief to supervisors
and 107 clerks its telephone section a
chief operator assistant chief operator
and 13 operators the records section
divided into seven sections general
immigration passport personnel political
mail and war trade board numbered
together with its supervisor assistants
Chiefs assistant Chiefs clerks and
messengers 269 making a total personnel
of 393 the cost of the Telegraph
messages alone amounted annually to
almost $500,000 in the fiscal year 1942
1941 about 1 million 125,000 pieces of
Correspondence passed through the
division and in 1941 to 1942 this was
almost doubled this division which
worked 24 hours a day and 365 days a
year put in annually over 21,000 hours
of unpaid overtime
end quote by the end of 1943 however the
division experienced a severe breakdown
in its operations quote the war had
almost demoralized the work of this
division owing to the low salaries paid
to its personnel and the pressure of
work which constantly necessitated
overtime the division of Communications
and Records had long been very unpopular
with its employees a survey of salaries
indicated that from 1936 to 1940 the
Department of State personnel had
received an average salary increase of
5.9 1% while the increase in the
division of communications and records
was only 0.5 1% in other words the
department's average increase was 11
times greater than that of the division
of communications and records as a
result of the low morale the work of the
division was unsatisfactory and under
constant criticism incoming
communications were delayed in
distribution papers were misplaced or
lost and inadequate records made it
difficult to locate them
serious errors were made in the code
room backlogs existed in every section
it was customary to have approximately
15,000 documents in the records branch
which were neither indexed nor listed on
the purport sheets the vitally important
telegraph section was on several
occasions as much as two days behind in
the coding and decoding of messages the
first requirement insisted upon by mr.
Raymond H Geist division chief was a
complete reclassification of positions
so that salaries commensurate with the
work might be available this was begun
immediately and resulted in a
considerable improvement in speed and
accuracy the other requirement was an
improvement of the procedure within the
division the huge backlog in the
telegraph section required emergency
action the War Department was asked to
help out and 20 enlisted men trained in
cryptography were loaned temporarily and
within 48 hours the backlog of 200,000
words or groups of words was completely
eliminated thereafter from 6 to 8 code
clerks from the War Department
remained to keep the work current as
soon as possible high speed equipment
was added to eliminate the slow
cumbersome manual labor of decoding for
example a machine will decode about 20
words or word groups per minute as
opposed to two point seven to three
words manually and the results are more
accurate working conditions were
improved air conditioning made it
possible to endure the heat generated by
the mechanical cipher devices
fluorescent lights reduced the
percentage of error the average time
required for a message in the code room
was reduced from 48 to six hours the
introduction of air grams also helped
materially in reducing the strain in the
code room end quote on September 22nd
1944 a new division of cryptography was
established concentrating entirely upon
cryptographic and related communications
functions at the Commerce Department the
Bureau of foreign and domestic
provided commercial information to
various government agencies making
special studies and reports for them it
acted as a major fact-finding
organization in the field of foreign
commerce for the foreign economic
administration the Coast and geodetic
survey provided charts maps titled data
and geodetic and coastal survey services
to the intelligence community the
National Bureau of Standards abandoned
many of its normal activities in order
to handle research and testing projects
for other government agencies some of
which are thought to have been of
intelligence interest the war division
of the Patent Office directed the search
of applications for inventions in
categories deemed of importance by
government war including intelligence
agencies the weather bureau of course
made its own unique contribution to
intelligence activities when its
assistance was requested and at the end
of the war within the office of
technical services established by a
departmental order on September 18 1945
the technical industrial intelligence
division quote continued the functions
of the technical industrial intelligence
committee which was originally set up
under the Joint Intelligence Committee
by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and was
transferred to the Department of
Commerce
on December 18 1945 it conducted
intensive searches in enemy and other
foreign countries to locate personnel
documents and material from which
technical and scientific industrial
information that was developed
especially during World War two
might be obtained it studied processes
methods and techniques useful for
obtaining such information and it
analyzed and appraised the information
obtained to determine its possible
usefulness to business and industry in
the United States
end quote at the Department of
Agriculture the agricultural research
administration developed information
regarding food production and war
created scarcities within both the
United States and enemy-held territory
overseas the Bureau of Agricultural
Economics produced similar information
pertaining to
and and supply consumption prices costs
and income marketing transportation
labor agricultural finance farm
management credit taxation land and
water utilization and other aspects of
agricultural production and distribution
quote in order to unify and consolidate
the administration of governmental
activities relating to foreign economic
affairs the foreign economic
administration also known as F EA was
established by an executive order of
September 25th 1943 the functions
Personnel and records of the office of
lend-lease administration the office of
foreign relief and rehabilitation
operations of the Department of State
and the foreign economic operations of
the office of foreign economic
coordination of the Department of State
were transferred to the administration
by an executive order of October 6th
1943 the functions of the war food
administration and the commodity Credit
Corporation with respect to the
procurement and development of food food
machinery and other food facilities in
foreign countries were also transferred
to the foreign economic administration
and as military operations permitted the
administration assumed responsibility
for and control of all activities of the
United States government in liberated
areas with respect to supplying the
requirements of and procuring materials
in such areas end quote
the foreign economic administration was
thus responsible for the wartime
functions of Export Control foreign
procurement lend-lease reverse
lend-lease participation in foreign
relief and rehabilitation and economic
warfare including foreign economic
intelligence its activities were
required to be in conformity with the
established foreign policy of the
government of the United States as
determined by the Department of State
there were three predecessors to the
foreign economic administration which
had responsibility for reprising the
chief executive of developments
weakening or endangering the
international
economic status of the United States
during the period of World War in July
1941 the President had created the
economic defense board for the purpose
of developing and coordinating policies
plans and programs designed to protect
and strengthen the international
economic relations of the United States
in the interest of national defense
within the boards for Geographic
divisions American hemisphere British
Empire Europe and Africa Far East
information available to existing
government agencies and private
commercial enterprises concerning the
economic organization capabilities and
requirements of the foreign countries
within each units area of responsibility
was obtained and analyzed on December
17th 1941 the name of the agency was
changed to the board of economic warfare
and it was subsequently given among
other added responsibilities the duty to
advise the State Department with respect
to the terms and conditions to be
included in the master agreement with
each nation receiving lend-lease aid to
provide and arrange for the receipt by
the United States of reciprocal aid and
benefits from the government's receiving
lend-lease and to represent the United
States government in dealing with the
economic warfare agencies of the United
Nations for the purpose of relating the
government's economic warfare program
and facilities to those of such nations
all of this meant that the board had to
develop appropriate information about
those nations requesting lend-lease aid
to determine if the grant was justified
by conditions in that country the agency
also had some responsibility for
deciding what strategic materials would
be imported into the United States such
information of course had a great
intelligence potential to assist in
these matters the board arranged through
the State Department to send technical
engineering and economic representatives
abroad by a directive of July 15 1943 an
office of economic warfare was
established within the office for
emergency management a wartime
superstructure agency in
proximity to the president and its
director assumed the functions powers
and duties of the board of economic
warfare which was terminated by the same
order lasting about six weeks the office
of economic warfare operated and was
organized in approximately the same
manner as the old board a directive of
September 25th consolidated the office
and certain other agencies together with
their personnel and records into the
foreign economic administration which
was created by the same order foreign
economic intelligence was prepared
within the foreign economic
administration by the bureau of areas
consisting of an office of the executive
director and six branches Pan American
British Empire and Middle East European
USSR Far East and other territories and
enemy all but the last were involved in
assessing the economic warfare of Allied
nations the enemy branch quote was
responsible for planning the economic
program to be put into effect when the
enemy countries should be occupied it
prepared studies and reports on the
industrial disarmament of the enemy
including analyses of the entire
economic structure of the axis countries
its staff units and divisions were
functional in nature and gave their
attention to problems relating to the
industrial disarmament external economic
security reparations and restitutions
requirements and allocations food and
agriculture foreign trade consumers
economy property control transportation
and communications and Industry of the
countries to be occupied the branch
cooperated closely with the technical
industrial Intelligence Committee a
subcommittee of the Joint Intelligence
Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
end quote
with the end of hostilities in Europe
and Asia the necessity for such an
agency ceased to exist quote by an
executive order of September 27 1945 the
foreign economic administration was
abolished and its remaining functions
were divided among five other agencies
to the State Department were transferred
the functions pertaining to lend-lease
activities and to liberated areas and
occupied territories as well as
responsibilities for economic and
commercial research and analysis and for
the participation by the United States
in the United Nations relief and
rehabilitation administration to the
reconstruction Finance Corporation were
returned three corporations that had
been taken over from it by the office of
economic warfare on July 15th 1943 and
the functions relating to the
procurement abroad of all commodities
except food the export-import bank of
Washington became again an independent
agency as provided by an act of July
31st 1945 the Department of Agriculture
received the functions pertaining to
food and to food machinery and other
food facilities including those of the
office of food programs the functions
pertaining to the control of exports
technical industrial intelligence and
the facilitation of trade and all other
functions not assigned to the other
agencies named above or transferred to
the Department of Commerce end quote
to special intelligence units were
established at the Federal
Communications Commission the first of
these the radio intelligence division
quote established on July 1st 1940 as
the National Defense Operations Section
of the field division of the engineering
department developed in the early years
of the war into the largest single part
of the Commission's staff under its
direction monitoring stations
strategically located throughout the
United States and its territories and
possessions kept all radio communication
channels under continuous surveillance
the surveillance was primarily aimed at
preventing radio communication with the
enemy abroad and the illegal use of
radio at home in addition to its
monitoring stations the division had
radio intelligence centers at Honolulu
San Francisco and Washington DC which
coordinated the reports in their
respective areas
concerning radio surveillance and
direction-finding activities and enemy
and ill
radio operations it also had mobile
coast units that supplied a
comprehensive mobile radio surveillance
extending throughout the coastal areas
of the western eastern and southern
defense commands at Washington
headquarters units of the division
prepared and distributed abstracts of
the intercepted messages for the chief
naval censor the chief signal officer
the weather bureau and the Coast Guard
plotted on maps the locations of
unidentified clandestine and illegal
stations translated foreign language
intercepts into English and provided
full investigatory services the division
picked up SOS calls and reports of
submarine attacks and relayed them to
naval stations furnished fixes to locate
lost airplanes ships in distress or
stations causing interference to vital
military circuits intercepted enemy
radio Telegraph intelligence covering
economic conditions war production
materials supplies morale and other
pertinent data trained personnel of
other government agencies in
direction-finding detection and
monitoring and the evaluation of fixes
its function differed from that of the
foreign broadcast intelligence service
in that it intercepted messages that
were sent in radio Telegraph code to
specific points as distinguished from
broadcasts of enemy for purposes of
propaganda and quote in addition the
foreign broadcast intelligence service
quote established as the foreign
broadcast monitoring service in February
1941 recorded translated analyzed and
reported to other agencies of the
government on broadcasts of foreign
origin it set up listening posts and at
silver Hill Maryland London San
Francisco Portland Oregon Kingsville
Texas San Juan Puerto Rico and other
places to intercept broadcasts of
foreign news intelligence or propaganda
emanating from authorized stations and
clandestine transmitters and belligerent
occupied and
neutral countries at the listening-posts
translations of the intercepted
broadcasts were made and immediately
teletype tore cabled to Washington
headquarters some broadcasts were also
recorded on disks at Washington incoming
wires and transcriptions were edited and
the more significant parts or the full
texts were teletype to the government
agencies that were waging war on the
military diplomatic and propaganda
fronts special interpretations and daily
and weekly summaries were prepared at
headquarters and distributed to
appropriate government agencies and
officials through cooperative
arrangements with the Office of War
Information the British Ministry of
Information and the British Broadcasting
Corporation editors of the service were
assigned to overseas posts maintained by
those agencies to select material
valuable for transmission to Washington
editors and monitors of the service
acted as part of the Army's
psychological warfare branch in North
Africa when Allied troops were landed
there in 1943 on December 30th 1945 the
service was transferred to the War
Department end quote
the office of War Information
established within the office for
emergency management by a directive of
June 13 1942 consolidated the office of
facts and figures the office of
government reports the division of
information of the office for emergency
management and the Foreign Information
Services outpost publications and
pictorial branches of the office of the
coordinator of information into one
agency more information functions of the
federal government both foreign and
domestic the unit's intelligence
functions included psychological warfare
both its development and effects and the
collection of overseas media print film
and radio in general the office
consisted of two principal branches
domestic operations and overseas
operations a policy development branch
was established in the initial
organization but lasted only until
September when it was absorbed
by the domestic operations branch within
the domestic operations branch in
addition to the media clearance and
production bureaus book and magazine
graphics motion picture news and radio
there were two intelligence entities the
foreign news bureau and the special
services bureau the former quote was
established in march 1944 taking over
the functions and records of the foreign
sources division of the news bureau its
main function was to provide the
American press radio commentators and
other news outlets with war information
obtained from foreign sources available
only in a limited way if at all to
non-governmental agencies to this end it
used monitoring services excerpts from
the press of occupied and enemy
countries and special reports from
overseas a special unit handled releases
to the religious and educational press
the bureau served as a receiving and
distributing agent for all pulled press
copy from overseas war theatres other
functions included the analysis of enemy
propaganda techniques
end quote on the other hand the special
services bureau quote continued
functions begun in the office of facts
and figures and the office of government
reports the bureau was responsible for
providing specialized informational
services to all agencies and for
providing the general public with a
centralized source of information
concerning government activities
organization and personnel its division
of educational services which provided
informational material for discussion
groups and helped to coordinate the
educational activities of war agencies
and its division of surveys which
conducted public opinion and other
surveys were terminated early in 1944
the divisions of press intelligence
public inquiries and research continued
until August 31st 1945 when the bureau's
remaining functions and records were
transferred to the Bureau of the budget
the following year they were again
transferred to the temporarily
reconstituted office of government
report
end quote within the overseas operations
branch in addition to its propaganda and
news production distribution and
analysis bureaus communications
facilities news and features overseas
motion picture overseas publications and
radio program there was an
administrative support unit the output
service Bureau and the Bureau of
overseas intelligence the Bureau of
overseas intelligence originally known
as the Bureau of research analysis
maintained a Central Intelligence file
kept a running audit of the reliability
of intelligence sources and provided all
sections of the overseas operations
branch with information necessary to
their activities until late in the war
it functioned through the current
liaison Division which maintained
liaison with the Department of State the
military intelligence service the Office
of Naval Intelligence the branches
overseas planning board in Washington
and operational intelligence offices
elsewhere and other agencies the
analysis division which classified and
analyzed intelligence from the foreign
press radio broadcasts intercepted
communications and other sources and
cooperated closely with the foreign
broadcast intelligence service and the
field intelligence division which
directed the collection and distribution
of intelligence from outposts in 1944
the bureau was recognized and thereafter
functioned through the Central
Intelligence Division the regional
analysis division and a special research
unit known as the foreign morale
analysis division end quote
the foreign morale analysis division
referred to above quote was established
in the spring of 1944 under a
cooperative arrangement with the
military intelligence service of the War
Department general staff to provide
information about the morale of the
Japanese and social conditions within
Japan its work was performed by two
groups one in the Office of War
Information and the other in the War
Department
the first group translated and analyzed
materials available through non-military
sources such as Japanese publications
and transcripts of Japanese broadcasts
while the War Department group analyzed
materials received from military sources
especially prisoner of war interrogation
reports and captured enemy documents by
the spring of 1945 the cooperative unit
was also known as the joint morale
survey and was divided into the morale
Research Unit OWI and the propaganda
section mainly army which was concerned
primarily with the analysis of Japanese
radio propaganda the results of the
research were presented to interested
officials by means of formal reports and
special memoranda and in formal and
informal conferences the reports ranged
from overall studies of military morale
and the effects of allied propaganda to
special studies of subjects investigated
upon request end quote
in addition to its central Washington
headquarters the office of War
Information maintained offices in New
York and San Francisco for the
performance of certain of its functions
in addition to various shifting outposts
overseas a major control facility was
established in London on VE Day the
office counted 38 outposts in 23
countries the agency had no jurisdiction
in Latin America and with the
termination of world hostilities owi
came to an end quote the office of War
Information was terminated by an
executive order of August 31st 1945 to
become effective September 15 1945 the
overseas operations branch including its
executive and security offices in New
York and San Francisco the office of the
assistant director for management and
the office of general counsel were
transferred with their records to the
interim international information
service of the Department of State which
was established by the same order On
January 1st 1946 these units became a
part of the Office of International
information
and Cultural Affairs of the Department
of State the functions and records of
the special Services Bureau were
transferred from the domestic operations
branch to the Bureau of the budget where
they remained until they were
transferred by an executive order of
December 12th 1946 to the reconstituted
office of government reports end quote
the office of censorship created by a
directive of December 19 1941 had
responsibility for censoring
communications by mail cable radio or
other means of transmission passing
between the United States and any
foreign country deriving its basic
operating authority from the first War
Powers Act of 1941 the office conducted
its work quote in some 20 postal
stations and 17 cable stations
throughout the country in accordance
with standards of censorship established
by the Washington office commissioned
officers of the Navy performed cable
censorship operations throughout the war
but postal censorship which was at first
carried on by commissioned officers of
the army was transferred to civilian
officials early in 1943 end quote
internally the office was organized into
seven divisions press broadcasting
postal cable administrative reports and
technical operations with regard to
intelligence matters the reports
division classified and delivered two
interested government agencies the
various types of submission slips made
in the process of censorship end quote
the technical operation unit quote was
created in August 1943 to perform the
work of the office of censorship in the
field of counter espionage it maintained
close liaison with the intelligence
agencies of the government and
supervised the work of censorship
laboratories and combating the use of
secret inks and developing techniques
for detecting codes and ciphers through
its efforts the office of censorship was
able to hinder the effectiveness of the
enemy's secret communications on the
basis of evidence uncovered by
the division the Federal Bureau of
Investigation built up espionage cases
leading to the conviction and punishment
of a number of axis agents end quote as
with the other temporary wartime
agencies the office of censorship ceased
operations with the end of world war
quote a presidential directive of August
15 1945 instructed the director of
censorship to declare a voluntary press
and radio censorship at an end and to
discontinue the censorship activities of
the office of censorship an executive
order of September 28 1945 provided that
the office should continue to function
for purposes of liquidation only until
November 15 1945 at which time it should
be terminated the Treasury Department
took over responsibility for completing
the liquidation of the affairs of the
office end quote
these were the principal federal
departments and agencies recognized to
have exhibited a capacity for
intelligence operations during World War
two this is not a definitive collection
of such intelligence entities depicted
here undoubtedly arguments could be made
for the inclusion of other units whose
intelligence capacity was not
immediately apparent in this research or
which otherwise had Secret Intelligence
functions however such exceptions in all
likelihood will be most unusual
omissions
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you